[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>The most revolutionary and
beautiful adventure of all
is to choose a life of
spiritual development.
How fascinating and curious it
is to pour our precious time
and efforts into this
most mysterious of ways,
which is practically invisible
to the mainstream world.
So what exactly is meant
by spiritual development?
Well, spiritual, pertaining to
spirit, spirit, a vital force
within the person
that gives them
life, energy, and
power, and inequality,
the non-physical essence
of a sentient being.
So to develop this
spirit is, of course,
to grow it and advance it,
but more than anything,
to understand its nature, to
comprehend its relationship
to the deeper reality around us.
What an intriguing
decision to give one's life
to this esoteric art.
It is a very romantic
and obscure thing to do,
I feel, especially within
the technology saturated
corridors of the 21st century.
In this globalist culture
that defines itself
through a pervasive commerce
and a mandatory mercantile
mode of behavior, how
remarkable and radical
it then is to focus on
spirit, to dedicate oneself
to something that offers no
tangible products or services.
There are no formal
qualifications
for spiritual
development, not really.
At root, it is not even a
philosophical or theological
inquiry in the strictest sense.
It is something else, and
you can't just use one system
or modality to articulate it.
No Buddhist or
Hermeticist or Christian
or shaman, psychologist
or Kabbalist, physicist
or astronomer has enough
within their specialist field
to properly elucidate it.
The wisdom must necessarily
come from many places.
Indeed, to specialize
too much in one area
can be a distinct disadvantage.
So a life of
authentic spirituality
requires of everyone the
attitude and capacity
of a Renaissance man or woman,
or as we would say today,
a polymath, someone
with expertise and skill
in many diverse disciplines,
different yet complementary
bodies of knowledge.
We are often asked in our
spiritual endeavours to bring
together many
disparate data points,
to paint a picture that only
a person learned in both art
and science can see, someone who
has the poetic impulse as much
as they have the engineer's eye.
All these skills and techniques
and studies-- how on Earth
could fit them in?
Will it not burst our brains
to attempt to educate ourselves
in all this stuff?
No, because it is meant to be
spread out over a lifetime.
And it's meant to be enjoyable.
This speaks of the
auto-didactic impulse.
That is the commitment
to educate oneself,
to educate oneself throughout
life to be a life-long learner.
And this sets the stage for
us to cultivate a deep insight
into the relationship
between ourselves
and the wider
universe around us,
to look deeply into
its profound nature
and take ourselves
seriously enough to ask
the big ontological questions.
Who am i?
Where did I come from?
Where am I going?
What am I best to do?
What is this life for?
In addressing these
things, we cease
to live for mere
diversions and pleasures,
and instead live for growth.
This is the indelible mark
of all spiritual students,
and it is here that we also
encounter the word "mystic,"
a mystic being someone simply
who seeks to engage directly
with a higher order of reality
or state of being or union
with divinity.
Mysticism is a discipline that
recognizes that greater truths
cannot be accessed purely
through our reason.
But instead are available
through the transformation
of self.
Mysticism values the
experiential over the abstract.
We do it.
Not just talk about it or think
about it or watch other people
do it, so you could say that
all those academic philosophers
and scrupulous formal
theorists really
are offering their own very kind
of abstract expressionist art
to the world-- highly
subjective and personal,
quite legitimate, but not at all
to be confused with depictions
of the things that are really
here in the world universally
understood.
Such an understanding cannot
be had by reason alone,
nor by representation.
We learn how things are only
by directly engaging with them.
It is a pioneering
business, this.
It is the work of an artisan.
The more honestly
and carefully we
look into the mechanics
of spiritual development,
the more we appreciate it is a
very serious enterprise indeed.
And I would propose to you
it is the most serious thing
you can ever do.
And yet if we take it too
seriously, we kill it.
And if we don't take it
seriously enough, we lose it.
So our spiritual refinement
must be comprehended
with a certain
delicacy, precision,
as it is when we hold a
butterfly in our cold hands.
Too hard, and it is dead.
To soft, and it flies away.
But with the right
balance and guardianship,
we can intimately observe
a great truth and beauty
in this world.
And in so doing, we share
in something quite sublime
that tells us about
the nature of reality.
In this series of
programs, I'm going
to explore with you the wisdom,
the attitudes, the techniques,
and the bearing necessary for
a very individualistic kind
of spiritual development,
which for me is the only way
to properly embrace a
healthy, spiritual life.
We shall examine ways of
metaphysical engagement
that are life-changing in their
insistence on authenticity.
We will cultivate a rigorous
personal sovereignty
that opposes all man-made
authority and dogma.
And whilst our
path will certainly
intersect with some familiar
spiritual territories,
always our eye will
be on independence
and an invigorating
personal liberty
to inquire into every
and any part of life.
Why do people come
to spirituality?
I would propose to you
that in the present times,
the spiritual development
of a human being
does not arise by itself.
An extraordinary act
of will is necessary.
People come to
spirituality, because they
sense something is
wrong with the world,
with their life, their world--
something close, something
significant, a matter that
is felt deep in the heart.
There is some warp in the
fabric of their reality
that doesn't make sense.
So when the scientific
and religious
and medical and
educational establishments
fail miserably to
explain what's going on,
what that distortion is,
the spiritual student
begins to take it upon
themselves to investigate.
So the journey begins.
So we come here because we
detect a twist in the tale,
as it were.
What can it provide,
this spirituality?
What is it that they're
looking for, these people?
What is that we're looking for?
I would say that people are
looking for solace and meaning,
initially, things that are
absent from the mainstream
paradigm of life
as a [? trader. ?]
They seek solace to be OK,
to be seen, heard, comforted,
strengthened.
To be OK enough to go
on, but is meaning that
is the real driver here, the
real motivation for this path.
Because only higher
meaning can possibly
explain the mystery of why bad
things happen to good people,
why some unaccountable
pain manifests,
why we see withering
diseases, unjust accidents,
bereavements, and heartbreaks.
Is it all just random?
Do unpleasant things
just accidentally arise?
Or is there something
else going on
that we are being
beckoned to examine?
So when there is an interruption
in the otherwise smooth
routines of life, and our
plans do not go as expected,
is it just coincidence or not?
Because we've all had the
experience where sometimes we
are left with broken
glass in our hands,
where once there was
a champagne flute.
Something wonderful
becomes something dreadful.
But why?
Why?
So we seek deeper answers.
We want to make sense of
the apparently senseless.
So meaning is very important
to the lucid human.
We want peace and pleasure
and harmony too, yes.
But the study of meaning is
what brings people close in.
It's a very intimate
and exceptional thing
to say for the first time in
our lives, what is this event?
What is this feeling
that breaks me in two?
Why did it happen?
What does it mean?
Not do I like it or dislike it?
Not does it help
me or hinder me?
But instead, purely and
powerfully and quietly,
what is it?
What is it?
An interesting thing
happens at this point.
Whereas we have perpetually
led everything with self,
we begin to lead with soul,
with our core essence,
quite untroubled by human
affairs, serene, deep, old.
Self is interested only in
security and comfort, really.
Those are its main
concerns to feel OK,
which is understandable.
Soul, on the other hand, is
philosophical in its nature.
It is concerned with purpose
and the true nature of things.
This is our pathway to meaning.
We can say, therefore, that
at root, spirituality is
the movement from self to soul.
So with this, the journey
of transformation begins.
We cease to be what we were
for so long for so many years
and become something else.
It is notable that
in both mainstream
and esoteric spiritual
systems, we often
see some form of initiation,
stages of admittance,
as it were, to
increasingly powerful,
profound levels of knowledge.
Why have this initiation?
Why not just tell everyone
the whole thing straight off?
Treat us like adults.
There are two reasons for
this initiatory process.
The first reason is this.
To be involved in what
was once called knowledge
of the sacred mystery is
an exceedingly privileged
position.
It can change a
person's mind and heart
beyond all recognition,
and when properly
integrated into
oneself, this knowledge
can also change external
reality physically.
Physically, the particular
nature of this world
around goes us and its
default physics shift.
This sacred knowledge
must, therefore,
be wisely and
sensitively safeguarded.
So systems were
devised to measure
the attainment, the character,
and the merit of a person.
And as that person proved
their readiness for advancement
over many years, higher levels
of knowledge and methodology
were gladly shared with them.
The second reason for initiation
was to protect autonomous,
mystical, and
spiritual groups, who
chose not to submit to the
dominating imperial religions
of the day.
And in the last
2,000 years, this
was most particularly evident
with the march of the Roman
Empire and the enforcement of
their version of Christianity,
otherwise known as the state
church of the Roman Empire.
Gone were the many centuries
of a plurality of gods
and the localized worship
of ancestral spirits-- gone.
Christianity became the
one and only faith as
defined in 380 AD with
the edict of Thessalonica.
All subjects of the
Roman Empire had
to agree to the faith of the
bishops of Rome and Alexandria,
imposing Nicene Christianity
as the compulsory religion
of the entire Roman Empire.
Those who did not properly
observe Nicene Christianity
were exiled or killed,
millions exterminated
across England, Germany, Spain,
Portugal, France, Greece,
Belgium, Switzerland, Romania,
Serbia, Turkey, Syria, Iraq,
Egypt, Algeria, Morocco, and
many other vast countries.
What an empire.
For our purposes today, we
must remember and realize
that at that time, it was
these very same places that
constituted the mystical
heartland of the new world.
Many sages and shamans and
druids and outstanding men
and women of inner excellence
lived and practiced
in these places.
Hundreds of thousands
of sacred temples,
which had peacefully served
as mystical focal points
for the spiritual
communities of Europe
and Northern Africa for
countless centuries,
were obliterated.
Not only were they destroyed.
They were built upon.
The powerful, energetic aspects
of the ground, of the earth
were sequestered into the
Nicene Christian paradigm.
The land and its potency was
subverted for other purposes,
and so the mystical groups
had to go underground
to survive the onslaught
of this terrible empire.
Men of deep learning,
high attainment,
and honorable conduct
chose to keep themselves
separate from the capricious
affairs and terrible violence
of ordinary men.
Knowing the staggering
ignorance of the world,
they protected themselves
and their teachings
by concealment, until more
tolerant and enlightened times.
It is sobering to consider
that despite the many problems
the world faces today,
we have a higher degree
of freedom and liberty
in our personal affairs
than they ever did.
This is a very recent thing.
Only 200 years
ago, we were still
executing people, human
beings, for what was pitifully
referred to as witchcraft.
This simply being
a word to describe
rural, spiritual practices that
were different to Christianity,
Roman Christianity.
Heresy was and
still is punished.
The punishment in the
West today is ridicule.
In more savage lands,
it is still death.
So privacy and
secrecy exist even
in this most modern and
progressive of mystical orders.
Secrets that were originally
designed to help teach
were now wrapped
in more secrets.
Honestly, today in a world
where everything is so instantly
accessible and on demand,
unraveling this secrecy
is beyond most
people's patience.
It is a hidden box in a hidden
room in an unknown house.
No directions, no map, no
compass, no flashlight,
no nothing.
So for these reasons
alone, we can
begin to appreciate why the
esoteric layer is always
very important in
spiritual development.
To know the meaning of why
things are hidden is important.
Esotericism cannot be altogether
dispensed with if we are
serious in our undertakings.
This will change in time.
But for now, we need
to understand it
as a part of our
spiritual training.
Different mystical
schools and traditions
had and have different methods
categorization and measurement
for sharing that knowledge.
Many have 10 key stages,
10 main initiatory phases.
Some are 35.
Some, 77.
If we were to super distill
all these systems down
to their very core
nature, we could
say there are five
main initiatory
levels-- student, apprentice,
initiate, adept, master.
Most people, the vast
majority of people,
never pass the student stage.
It requires super perseverance,
application, and initiative.
And as I say, especially
in this modern world,
people simply do not
the time and tenacity
to fulfill these
basic requirements.
And so they brush up
against the outer shell
of the mystical groups, the
exoteric layer, and then leave.
They learn only the
principles, the parables,
and the external
symbols, which is OK.
They're not ready to progress.
That's fine.
Their platform is not
yet strong enough,
so they go out into the
world for a few hundred
or a few thousand more years,
stabilize and fortify, and then
return for more serious
study and application
when they are ready, when
they are truly ready.
Fortunately for us, the
structure of life itself,
the very fabric of life
has a way of preparing us
for wisdom and growth.
In the following programs,
we shall learn more
about soul and its
beautiful nature.
Do join me next time.
Until then, thank
you for watching,
and have a beautiful day.
[MUSIC PLAYING]